once around Giza 876.
So GZA 876 is a small red star
in the constellation of Aquarius just
next to the Delta star Delta Aquari and
it's one of the nearby stars 16 light
years away from the sun just 35% of the
mass so a fairly mediumsized red dwarf
and such stars are quite dim it only
outputs about 1% of the total energy and
a lot of the energy that comes away is
in the infrared. So there's precious
little by way of visible light.
But by looking at the light, we discover
a slight mystery with glazer 876. And
that is that the spectrum reveals very
few of the heavier elements. The big
bang formed hydrogen and helium and not
very much else. All the other elements
have been manufactured in the cores of
stars and scattered across the cosmos as
those stars have come to the end of
their life and exploded as supernovi or
puffed off their outer layers as
planetary nebula.
So the universe gradually became dirtier
with these heavy elements. And this
means that stars that were formed later
pick up more of them and old stars that
were formed a long time in the past
picked up fewer.
And this points to an early formation
time for Gleaser 876 and an age of
somewhere in the region of 7 to 9
billion years.
But it seems to be in the region and
moving as part of the young disc
population stars young as opposed to
old. There are these two distinct
populations in the disc of the Milky Way
whose exact positions seem to be
different. And there's a little bit of a
mystery here. We think that the two
populations derive from a previous
galactic merger. Um, possibly the
hypothetical galaxy called Gaia
Enceladus merging with the proto Milky
Way a long time ago seeded these two
populations.
And when we look at the Milky Way today,
we see these two groups in different
parts of the galactic disc. The older
stars have migrated and appear to bulge
out of the main plane and the younger
stars make up a thinner region directly
in the plane. So that's really where the
classification comes from. But Giza 876
seems to be part of the younger
galactic disc stars and those mostly
seem to be around five billion years in
age. So there's a something of a
mismatch in the uh age expectations
here.
The other interesting thing of course is
the discovery of planets around these
nearby stars and this one's no
exception. We've found a multiple planet
stellar system using the radial velocity
method where we look at the light of the
star and check to see if it is
oscillating between bluer and redder by
looking at the movement of the spectral
lines in the spectrum. And if that's
happening, it's due to the Doppler
effect of the star orbiting the common
center of mass between it and its
planets. And by analyzing the those
subtle changes, we can infer the
presence of uh the a system of planets
going around these other stars.
Now, this is a cooler star, an M-class
red dwarf, and as such, the region of
interest, the habitable zone is much
closer to the star. In this case,
calculations would put it from 0.116
to 0.2 227 astronomical units if you ask
me that's being overprecise and uh 10%
to 20 something% would be a better way
of saying that but nevertheless closer
in in order to get enough heat to reach
a temperature where liquid water can
exist. And so what of the planets of
Giza 876?
Well, this is planet B and this was
discovered by uh Marci and Del Fosik. U
again using the Doppler spectroscopy
method and this is enormous. It's more
than double the mass of Jupiter. Huge
gas giant planet orbiting at 21%
of the Earth's sun distance. So just on
the edge of that habitable zone. Now,
I'm not suggesting that a giant gas
planet like this is habitable, but of
course, it's very likely to have a
family of moons. And so, we might find a
fairly significant planet-sized moon or
two going around, and those two would be
on the edge, the outer edge, the colder
side of the habitable zone.
Second in order of discovery was 876C
orbiting closer in this too is a gas
giant similar in mass to that of Saturn
and just 0.13.
So that's the inner edge of the
habitable zone. But again perhaps this
too has some rocky moons. It wouldn't
surprise me to find that at all. And
this is the sort of study that's now
going on trying to find these exom
moons. And we're beginning to do so,
finding some fairly large ones. I think
the first one to be discovered was a
Neptunized moon going around a gas giant
that was 10 times the mass of Jupiter,
but of course it's easy to find larger
things than small ones.
876D.
Well, this was found a few years later
in 2005, and it's one of these super
Earth
planets, nearly seven times the mass of
our own and likely to be a rocky planet.
But there are other possibilities. This
is a sort of intermediate size between
uh the Earth mass and something like
Neptune. So, there's a possibility this
could be more of a mini Neptune than a
super Earth.
It's inside the orbit of the other two,
0.02 astronomical units, so 50 times
closer to its star than we are, and
hurtling round in two days. And that's
so close that it's very likely to be
extremely hot. Temperature 350 C. So,
it's every possibility actually that any
of those volatile chemicals that tend to
make up gas giants will have been burnt
away, boiled off. And so, perhaps rocky
world's more the most likely
explanation.
And 876E,
well, that's the fourth planet to be
discovered in 2010 after another 5 years
of data had been collected. And this is
an ice giant. It's similar to Neptune,
16 Earth masses, um, 0.33 astronomical
units going around in a 124day orbit. So
overall, the planetary system looks like
this with the innermost planet D, then
C, B, and E in that order. And the ratio
of the orbital periods of the first
three, the gas giants is in a 1:24
pattern.
And that's very similar to the moons of
Jupiter, Io, Europa, and Ganymede. A
so-called resonance, a laplas resonance.
Now, those laplas resonances tend to
push the planets into more elliptical
orbits. They keep giving each other a
nudge in the same direction every time
they meet and so that forces them off
circular and as a result they end up
approaching closer and further away from
the star and that creates the situation
for tidal heating inside them inside any
rocky core. probably doesn't affect gas
giants in their envelope very much as
there wouldn't be a huge amount of
resistance to the tidal
uh change of shape. But if they had a
fairly significant rocky core, then
that's where the heat would be
generated.
And it also tends to point towards sort
of gravitational interactions uh of an
interesting nature. And really what made
KZA 876 most interesting is that it
could well be the parent system for the
interstellar visitor OMU MUA I1 2017 U1
that came through the solar system back
in the period and has been traced back
820,000
years across the galaxy
to the time when it had a slow speed
encounter with Gleer 876,
the relative velocity was only 5
kilometers per second. And that's a
plausible velocity for such an object to
have been ejected from the gravity well
of the star as a result of perturbations
and interactions between the existing
planets.
Um, so there's a whole video about that
if you're interested. Um, and I'll just
leave you with a overview of what the
solar system there might look like. And,
uh, thanks very much for listening to
that short video about Giza 876.